---
lang: en-US
title: Drafting an Organizational Plan
description: Drafting an Organizational Plan
---

[[toc]]

## Drafting an Organizational Plan

### Clustering and Diagramming
Although at this point you should already have a good sense of your main ideas, you’ve probably amassed a profusion of notes and informal writing that might seem a little overwhelming. How do you bring order and shape to all these ideas and pre- sent them in a way that’s clear, economical, and persuasive?
Often, the difficulty is that you’ve spent so much time arriving at your position that the validity of your argument now seems almost self-evident. You can lose sight of the long road that led to this point. You got here by taking a meandering route through data, questions, arguments, and counterarguments, but your reader has not taken this journey. To the reader, your argument is not at all obvious; in fact, the reader might hold a view of the matter that shares nothing with your own. How, then, can you conceive of your argument as a series of logical steps, a direct path from problem to solution? How will you know where to start and end and how to show the steps that lead to your main argument?
The most practical way to break an argument into steps is to group ideas into clusters. You can then arrange these clusters in a diagram and thereby visualize your whole argument’s shape and get a sense of the big picture. As you work, you should be able to see how related ideas can be gathered into groups. The important thing is to begin to see relations among ideas — ways of bringing elements together or separating them.

Diagramming your ideas makes it possible to develop a clear and strong orga- nizational scheme, to keep your main argument in focus throughout your draft, and to concentrate on one element of your argument at a time as you write. It also helps you identify what to keep and what to cut.

If you produced a radial diagram as a reading strategy (see Chapter 3, “Constructing a Radial Map of the Text,” pp. 00–00), you are already familiar with this tech- nique. You can create a cluster diagram with pencil and paper or using writing software, mind-mapping software, or a drawing app on your computer. Each medium has its pros and cons, though the computer usually gives a tidier final product. (Noth- ing is simpler than clustering ideas and drawing diagrams with a pencil, but moving clusters around and making revisions on paper means erasing and rewriting, which quickly gets messy.) If you’re working on a long essay involving a complex argument, consider using a pencil and paper initially and moving to the computer later. (See p. 000 for guidelines for creating cluster diagrams on a computer.)

### Guidelines Creating Cluster Diagrams on a Computer
Most writing apps, such as Microsoft Word, Apple’s Pages, and Google Docs, make it possible to create a cluster diagram. The procedure varies slightly from one app to another, but it typically works like this:
• Insert a text box into a new document, and drag the cursor to create a rectangle.
• Type a line or two of text inside the text box.
• Drag the handles to resize the text box. Double-click to change the fill color.
• Use drawing tools to join boxes with lines or arrows.
An easier way to create cluster diagrams on a computer is to use a drawing app or mind-mapping software. Popular mind-mapping programs include XMind (free and open source), Coggle (a free Web app), FreeMind (free), SimpleMind (free), Mindix (free), MindNode, Scapple, and MindMeister (Web app).

There are no rules for this kind of work; in fact, playing around with your ideas and experimenting with different arrangements is really the point. A good way to get started is to write out your thesis statement in the center of the page. Arrange main topics at some distance from the center so that you have plenty of room for other notes. Use a brief phrase to note each main point below each topic heading. (Some topic headings may end up with very few notes, and that’s fine. It doesn’t necessarily mean the topic is weak or unimportant.)
At first, simply focus on clustering, gathering up the main points that each topic or component of your argument requires. Your cluster diagram might look something like Figure 6.1. Once you’ve got most of the main components on the

page, you can begin arranging the clusters. At this point, you can move the thesis statement to the top of the page and organize the argument in a logical order below it, as in Figure 6.2 (see p. 000).

### Revising Organization: Constructing a Sentence Outline
Now that you have diagrammed the components of your argument, you are in a position to develop an outline. We have deliberately left a discussion of outlining until after you have developed an argument, even if only a rudimentary one. An outline is a revision tool, one that helps you arrange or rearrange ideas that already exist. If you use an outline too soon, it easily becomes a straitjacket: it inhibits your thinking and shuts out good ideas that haven’t yet occurred to you. You need to have material for your argument before you can begin to arrange that material.
You can begin organizing your argument with a very simple outline—little more than your thesis, your motive, one or two claims, and perhaps a note about the evidence that supports these claims. At first, forget about how ideas are arranged in your notes and informal writing; it’s time to think fresh and figure out the clearest and simplest way to lay out your ideas. For this purpose, it helps to put into words the nucleus or essence of your argument in the form of two or three propositions that explain its basic reasoning ( for example, “I think [my thesis] is valid because . . .”). This will help you begin your outline. The important thing is to use full sentences and not just words or brief phrases that merely identify topics. An argument is composed not of a string of topics but of ideas that have a logical rela- tionship to one another. Only full sentences can represent your ideas and their relationships.
Ideally, each sentence in your outline will represent a paragraph in your final draft. But it may take a bit of trial and error before you get to that point. Your sen- tence outline will clarify your sense of the overall shape of the argument and what each paragraph in the essay needs to do. Even after the outline seems complete, however, you may well need to revise it as your essay evolves. Paragraphs can develop in such a way that they cease to correspond exactly to the outline, or a paragraph can grow to the point where it needs to be split in two, or a paragraph may turn out to work better in a different place in the essay than you expected. The organization of an essay changes as it develops, which is just as it should be — that’s part of the adventure of the writing process. And because your outline and your essay draft complement each other and take on a reciprocal relationship, each will change to reflect changes in the other. The outline will help guide you, but eventu- ally, after the essay has begun to take its final form, your gauge for making decisions about organization will shift away from the outline and toward your imagined reader — “the reader over your shoulder.”

### Work Out the Nucleus of Your Argument
To begin, you need to have a reasonably clear sense of your argument’s general shape—not yet paragraph by paragraph, but in larger chunks or stages. You can clarify your sense of the main stages by writing out a two- or three-sentence sum- mary of the argument you want to make in support of your thesis. (This summary is not the same thing as the thesis statement itself: rather than being the main point your essay will make, the summary lists the reasons that your point is valid.) This nucleus will help you see the logical structure of your argument more clearly. Every argument will differ, of course, but to speak in the most general terms, the nucleus will probably take a form something like this: “If you understand this, then you’ll see this next thing. And if you understand that, then surely you’ll agree that my thesis is valid.” Or “Here’s a true story. Here’s the lesson I take from the story. If this lesson is valid, it suggests that x [a commonly held belief] may not always be true after all.” Or “Because x seems to be true, it follows that y is probably true too. And there’s good evidence for z as well. If both y and z are true, then, as you see, my the- sis is probably valid. Now, some may say y and z are false, but their arguments are flawed because a, b, and c.”
A summary statement includes several stages, and if we separate them out, we have the beginnings of an outline. Each stage might require several paragraphs in the finished essay. (The number of paragraphs assigned to each stage here is just for the purpose of illustration; the actual number would depend on the nature of the particular argument.) Figure 6.3 shows one possible arrangement and paragraph count for the body of an essay.
The model in Figure 6.3 tells us that the body of this essay might require seven paragraphs. (With an introductory paragraph and a concluding paragraph, the complete essay might have nine paragraphs.) But as your writing moves along, you may realize that your summary statement has too few or too many paragraphs. No problem: the outline is not meant to imprison you; its purpose is to help you think like a reader and transform writerly drafting into a readerly finished product.

  One introductory paragraph to describe the problem and present the thesis
  Three paragraphs to explain and support the main claims
  Two paragraphs to explain and support further claims that follow from those above
  One paragraph to refute counterarguments
  One paragraph tying all the arguments above back to the thesis, showing that it is valid
  One concluding paragraph to explain the significance of the argument and present directions for further research

Figure 6.3 Model of a Summary Statement

If you can write out the logic of your argument in two or three sentences, you can usually see its general shape and get a rough sense of how it will need to be organized. You can see what the stages of the argument are and begin to work out what points must be made in order to establish each stage. These points are the claims that make up the skeleton of your argument. Typically, each claim that needs to be argued will require a separate paragraph. Some claims, however, need very little argument, either because they are common knowledge or because a reliable authority has already demonstrated their validity; in such cases, all you need to do is to cite the source. Claims that need little or no argument can usually be folded into other paragraphs.

