---
lang: en-US
title: 1. Rhetoric and Composition
description: Chapter 1
---

[[toc]]

# Rhetoric And Composition

## What is rhetoric?

Rhetoric is the study of oral, written, and visual persuasion. Oral
speeches were an important part of social, political, and judicial life
in ancient Greece, which gave birth to democratic government.
Aristotle’s work, *The Art of Rhetoric*, is one of the earliest known
books on the subject. For the next 2,300 years, classical rhetoric was
an integral part of Western culture: most educated citizens were
required to take classes in it.

## What is the purpose of rhetoric?

Rhetoric helps us determine how to use reason, emotion, and the strength
of our own character to persuade others to change their views. It allows
us to think critically about how others attempt to persuade us. It
further provides methods for generating, arranging, and styling content.
It directs our attention, as writers, to the importance of rhetorical
situations, audience awareness, and voice.

## Where can I find more online information about rhetoric?

Try the website [{Silva Rhetoricae}](http://rhetoric.byu.edu), or "The
Forest of Rhetoric," which explains the rhetorical proofs of ethos,
pathos, and logos and lists and defines figures of speech.

## What is composition?

Composition is a discipline concerned with how to write or compose
language. To compose is to select and arrange words to achieve your
purposes. There are many reasons to writefor example, you might write to
express yourself, to entertain others, to persuade, to maintain contact,
to clarify, or to synthesize material.

Composition classes grew out of rhetoric classes. By the mid 19th
century, due to the increase in students attending college, rhetoric
courses shifted from emphasizing speaking to focusing on writing. During
the 1960s in America, the modern professional study of composition
began, with an emphasis on research that explained how best to teach
college writing.

## Why take a composition class?

Writing well is crucial for success in college and in the professional
world. Learning to compose your thoughts in language that is clear,
organized, sophisticated, precise, and educated will allow you to
communicate effectively with peers, professors, colleagues, and
employers.

## Are there any good websites that will help me with my writing?

Visit [{Purdue University’s Online Writing
Lab}](http://owl.english.purdue.edu), or OWL, which has information on
formatting and common writing errors, research tips, worksheets and
exercises.