---
lang: en-US
title: 2. Types of College Writing
description: Chapter 2
---

[[toc]]


# Types of College Writing

Writing in college takes many forms. Your writing instrutor may ask you
to complete assignments that focus on particular "modes" of writing such
as narrative, exposition, synthesis, or analysis. However, there are
seldom clear boundaries between these rhetorical forms. For instance, a
research paper often includes synthesis and argument; an analysis is
often performed in the service of an argument; a proposal is an argument
often based in research; and arguments may include narrative features.
The following are the most common forms of writing that you will
encounter in your college coursework:

## Expository

A paper in which you report on, define, summarize, clarify and/or
explain a concept or a process. The purpose of this paper is to provide
information to an audience unfamiliar with the subject or to demonstrate
for a professor that you have understood course material. Research is
often required. Clarity and organization are key.

## Synthesis

A paper in which you pull together information from different sources on
one topic or in which you examine the connections between the
perspectives of various authors on one issue. It is essential that you
move beyond summarizing each source and/or author discreetly, and
clarify the relationships between ideas (whether from different sources
or different authors). Thus, you must focus on where authors agree and
disagree, or where ideas conflict or complement each other. Transitional
words and phrases are extremely important for synthesis papers.

## Analysis/Close reading

Analysis requires you to look at a work (a reading, film, musical piece,
etc.), a process, a person, or an issue and break it into smaller units
in order to explain how those units function independently and how they
work together to create the whole. You might, for example, do a
rhetorical analysis to analyze how successfully an author persuades his
audience, a visual analysis to explain how a film creates a certain mood
or communicates a theme, or a poem to examine how figures of speech work
to convey meaning at the level of the sentence.

## Argument

A paper that requires you to make a claim about a debatable issue, which
you then back up with evidence (examples, data, quotes from experts,
etc.). An argument also usually requires you to recognize (and refute,
concede, or undermine) opposing arguments and to qualify your claim.

## Response

A paper written in response to a specific question or prompt. It may
involve any of the other modes of writing. You should be sure you have a
strong sense of the professor’s expectations as well as a good grounding
in the subject matter (which often comes from lectures, course rereadings, and discussions).

# Proposal

An argument in which you propose that something should be done in the
future. This often requires you to anticipate possible constraints and
obstacles, qualify your claims, and pay close attention to the needs of
the audience.

# Research paper

Any paper that requires you to draw on sources other than your own
thinking. Be sure you are familiar with the citation format required by
each discipline/professor/class (i.e. APA, MLA, and Chicago Style), and
that you understand what plagiarism is and how it can be avoided.

# Narrative

A paper that tells a story, whether fictional, nonfictional, or a blend.
Narratives can be used to entertain, inform, or persuade (or some
blend).