---
lang: en-US
title: 3. Working with Sources
description: Chapter 3
---

[[toc]]

# Working with Sources

Academic writing will require you to integrate the ideas and words of
other scholars into your own writing. There are only three ways that the
writing of others may appear in your writing: **quotation**,
**summary**, and **paraphrase**. Writing an academic paper requires a
mastery of all three critical skills.

## Quotation

### When should I quote something?

Quoting is word-for-word borrowing from a source text. As we describe
below, quotation should be used sparingly. Only quote under the
following scenarios:

- When the subject you are writing about is the specific language used
  within a text, such as an interpretation of a line of poetry or a
  passage from a literary text.

- You are calling on the words of a known authority, on whose
  credibility you are depending. For example, if you are writing on
  racial inequality, a quotation from Martin Luther King, Jr. is
  appropriate.

- When the source text contains language that is memorable, beautiful,
  or particularly apt.

- A quotation is often necessary when you describe legal discourse (such
  as a law or court ruling) where words cannot be paraphrased or
  summarized without altering the meaning and effect of the legal
  language.

### How do I integrate quoted material?

- Use a **signal phrase** to introduce the quoted passage.

- Use quotation marks.

- Provide a citation in your chosen format, such as MLA or Chicago.

- If necessary, use ellipsis or square brackets to alter the source,
  satisfy grammar, or provide clarifying information.

  ## What should I avoid?

- **Avoid excessive use of quotation**. If you quote too often it can
  make it appear that you have not fully read or understood the source
  material. It may also make your writing appear lazy and thoughtless.

- **Avoid excessive use of block quotation**. Block quotations should be
  rare, and reserved for special language that you believe cannot be
  summarized, paraphrased, or otherwise reduced.

- **Avoid inserting a quote within your writing without providing your
  commentary**. Expand on your quotations, clarify or critique them, and
  connect them to your other sources and your argument.

- **Avoid inserting quotations without signal phrases**. Quotations
  should be introduced and woven into your own writing. They should
  rarely stand alone.

# Altering quotations

When you remove a quotation from its original context and place it
within your own writing, you must ensure that the resulting sentence(s)
remain grammatical and comprehensible. Occasionally, you may need to
slightly alter the original source material to satisfy grammar or give
your readers information that will help them follow your meaning. To
alter a source, make use of **brackets** and **ellipsis**.

## How do I use brackets?

Square brackets are used to alter source material in two ways. First, in
the interest of grammar, a bracket may be used to change a verb tense,
alter capitalization, or add a word. Secondly, a bracket may also be
used to provide clarifying information for the reader.

This sentence has been altered to satisfy grammar:

> Simon Frith believes we "use music to organize our sense of time
> \[and\] to make our private feelings public" (87).

This sentence has been altered to provide the reader with clarifying
information:

> John Cole declared the "Department \[of Homeland Security\] a waste of
> money" (97).

## How do I use ellipsis?

Occasionally, we need to remove words or sentences from a quotation. To
do this, we use a series of dots, known as ellipses, to show when you
have altered a source by omitting words or sentences. Be careful that
the quote you present to the reader is an *accurate* reflection of the
original text; it is improper (and unethical) to hack up a text so that
it says something that the author didn’t really intend. Further, the
"hybrid" sentence that you produce must be grammatical.

When omitting words within a single sentence, use three periods in your
ellipsis. However, if the omission crosses a period and continues into
another sentence, you must use four dots in your ellipsis to indicate
where the period is located in the original source. For example:

**Original source**:

Rock music depends on the myth of authenticity. Paglia is wrong to
believe that only contemporary rock musicians play music to make money.
Rock music has never been authentic and spontaneous, or particularly
revolutionary.

**You write**:

Gracyk believes that "Rock music depends on the myth of authenticity. .
. . Rock music has never been authentic . . . or particularly
revolutionary" (23).

# Using signal phrases

## What are they?

Signal phrases are words used to indicate that the material you are
incorporating is borrowed from a source. Often, a signal phrase uses the
name of the author from whom the text is borrowed.

## Why use them?

- They make it clear that you are transitioning from your own ideas and
  writing to the ideas and writing of another. This makes your paper
  more coherent.

- They make it clear when you have begun to paraphrase or summarize.
  Unlike quotations, paraphrases and summaries are not formatted with
  quotation marks; therefore, it is difficult for readers to know when
  or where you have begun to paraphrase or summarize unless you include
  these phrases.

- They make the tone of your paper more academic and authoritative.

- They compel you to articulate how your ideas relate to those you have
  borrowed from others. This will direct your attention to the precise
  ways in which authors agree or disagree with you or each other, and
  allow you to make these intersections clear to your reader.

- Using these signal phrases will help you to avoid plagiarism.

## How do you construct a signal phrase?

- **Use the author’s name**. The first time you mention an author,
  include the author’s full name, the title of his or her work, and
  perhaps a brief statement indicating the author’s credentials. Once
  you have introduced an author in your paper, only use his or her last
  name if you mention him or her again.

- **Use a strong verb to characterize what the author has “done.”** See
  the list below for suggestions. Be sure to pick the verb which most
  precisely articulates the author’s action:

  > asserts, argues, believes, claims, emphasizes, insists, observes,
  > reports, suggests, acknowledges, admires, agrees, corroborates,
  > endorses, extols, praises, verifies, illustrates, expands on,
  > rejects, complicates, contends, contradicts, denies, disagrees,
  > refutes, questions, warns, proposes, implores, exhorts, demands,
  > calls for, recommends, urges, advocates, wonders, asks, rejects,
  > encourages.

The following paragraph demonstrates the appropriate use of signal
phrases:

> In his article, "Writing is Thinking," Dr. Benjamin Warhol, a
> composition scholar, rejects the idea that one must have an outline
> prepared before one drafts a paper. While recognizing that some
> students must prepare their thoughts beforehand, Warhol warns that too
> much time spent on outlines may actually prevent students from
> completing papers on time (22-5). However, Sally T. Osmond, poet and
> creative writing instructor at Fordham University, disagrees, arguing
> that students who make a plan before they begin their drafts tend to
> write more organized and fluent essays (7).

# Summarizing

In a summary you present the ideas of another writer in a condensed
form. The length of a summary is dictated by your rhetorical needs,
however they are always shorter than the original text. For example, the
summary of a large book could be 20 pages, one paragraph, or one
sentence. Although a summary sacrifices specificity and detail in the
interest of brevity, it must always remain a faithful representation of
the original text.

## Why are summaries important?

Summary is one of the central skills needed for academic writing.
Summary is used to provide the reader with background knowledge on a
particular problem, history, or conversation. We also use summary to
provide the reader with an appropriate context, so that our ideas may be
understood within the broader context of writings on the subject in
question. An excellent summary of this context goes far to establish you
as a knowledgeable authority with your reader, someone whose views
should be trusted and considered.

## How do I incorporate them?

- Since summaries do not use quotation marks, you must take care to
  indicate to your readers that you are borrowing from the work of
  others. This is primarily accomplished through the use of a **signal
  phrase** and a citation. As you move from your own writing to the
  summary of others, use a signal phrase to indicate this transition.

- End the summary with an appropriate citation, noting the page(s)
  summarized.

## What should I avoid?

- Plagiarizingremember, summarized material is still borrowed material,
  even though you have greatly condensed it and put it entirely in your
  own words.

## Example of a summary

The source text below is taken from page 35 of Patricia Nelson
Limerick’s essay, "Empire of Innocence."

**Original source**:

> "When academic territories were parceled out in the early twentieth
> century, anthropology got the tellers of tales and history got the
> keepers of written records. As anthropology and history diverged,
> human differences that hinged on literacy assumed an undeserved
> significance. Working with oral, preindustrial, prestate societies,
> anthropologists acknowledged the power of culture and of a received
> worldview; they knew that the folk conception of the world was not
> narrowly tied to proof and evidence. But with the disciplinary
> boundary overdrawn, it was easy for historians to assume that
> literacy, the modern state, and the commercial world had produced a
> different sort of creature entirely—humans less inclined to put myth
> over reality, more inclined to measure their beliefs by the standard
> of accuracy and practicality" (Limerick 35).

**Summary**:

> As Patricia Nelson Limerick argues in her essay “Empire of Innocence,”
> historians have assumed that literate societies with vibrant economies
> and systems of governance were never beholden to myth or superstition
> (35).

# Paraphrasing

Think of paraphrase as a translation from English into English. It
involves taking language from a source, putting it in your own words,
and arranging it within your own original sentence structure(s). Unlike
summary, which aims to reduce or distill an idea, a paraphrase should be
similar in length to the original passage.

## Why are paraphrases important?

Accurate paraphrase demonstrates mastery of your source materials and
indicates an author who is in control of his or her own writing and
thinking. Whereas excessive quotation may reveal an uncertain or
tentative author, paraphrase demonstrates control and confidence.
However, ensure that your paraphrases do justice to the original, or
risk compromising your authority with your readers.

## How do I incorporate them?

- Like summaries, paraphrases do not use quotation marks. As a result,
  you must take care to indicate to your readers that you are borrowing
  from the work of others with a **signal phrase** and citation. As you
  move from your own writing to the paraphrase of others, use a signal
  phrase to indicate this transition.

- End the paraphrase with an appropriate citation.

## What should I avoid?

- Plagiarizingremember, paraphrased material is still borrowed material,
  even though you have put it in your own words.

- Merely changing a word or a phrase here or there. Instead, read the
  passage until you can put it aside and write your paraphrase without
  having to look back at it.

## Example of Paraphrase

The source text below is taken from page 35 of Patricia Nelson
Limerick’s essay, "Empire of Innocence."

**Original source**:

> When academic territories were parceled out in the early twentieth
> century, anthropology got the tellers of tales and history got the
> keepers of written records. As anthropology and history diverged,
> human differences that hinged on literacy assumed an undeserved
> significance. Working with oral, preindustrial, prestate societies,
> anthropologists acknowledged the power of culture and of a received
> worldview; they knew that the folk conception of the world was not
> narrowly tied to proof and evidence. But with the disciplinary
> boundary overdrawn, it was easy for historians to assume that
> literacy, the modern state, and the commercial world had produced a
> different sort of creature entirely—humans less inclined to put myth
> over reality, more inclined to measure their beliefs by the standard
> of accuracy and practicality (35).

**Paraphrase**:

> In "Empire of Innocence," Patricia Nelson Limerick argues that during
> the early part of the last century the disciplines of anthropology and
> history separated. While anthropology focused on unlettered and
> illiterate communities, history became the study of societies who
> produced texts and records. Within the field of anthropology, a firm
> belief developed that oral cultures were characterized by mythological
> worldviews and superstitious beliefs; on the other hand, historians
> assumed that literate cultures were filled with individuals who only
> used reason and evidence to guide their thinking (35).