---
lang: en-US
title: Critical Thinking
description: Explains the basic concepts of critical thinking
---

[[toc]]

## Critical Thinking
Instructors often use the phrase critical thinking in connection with writing assignments. This umbrella term refers to the creative ways of using knowledge that we have just described: applying ideas, analyzing ideas (or taking them apart), synthesizing ideas (or putting them together), and evaluating ideas. When used in ordinary speech, the word “critical” often has a negative connotation (for example, “Helen was critical of my taste in clothes”). But it has another meaning that carries none of this negative sense. Deriving from the Greek word for “judgment,” it means in this sense “involving careful and exact observation and judgment.” College writing instructors often speak of critical reading, critical writing, and critical thinking — all terms that imply attention to detail, careful reasoning, and a mental attitude that seeks out the rational basis for claims rather than accepting them merely on authority. Richard Rodriguez, author of a well-known intellectual autobiography entitled *Hunger of Memory* (1982), recalls his precocious reading habits as a grade school student. By the time he entered high school, he had read hundreds of difficult books that most students would not encounter until college. “But I was not a good reader,” he writes. “Merely bookish, I lacked a point of view when I read. Rather, I read in order to acquire a point of view.”[^3]

Now an adult, Rodriguez recognizes that he had formerly been too passive and diffident a reader, too ready to accept what he read at face value, and unable to enter into any sort of dialogue with texts because he lacked ideas of his own. To be able to have a conversation with texts is essential to critical reading and writing. It requires no great fund of learning or special expertise; all it really requires is curiosity, a readiness to pose questions and to wonder, and a degree of confidence in your right to do so. These are precious skills, yet ones that everyone possesses to some degree. They are certainly the keys to critical thinking. Criticism, then, can refer not to the business of finding fault but to the business of analyzing a text closely, entering into a conversation with it, and bringing an independent mind to bear. The result might be a judgment of some kind — positive or negative — but it might equally be a new insight or perspective that emerges from this encounter between a curious mind and a text.

Reading is the principal means by which college writers inform their thinking and develop new ideas. For this reason, three chapters in this book are concerned with reading strategies. The act of reading and the act of scholarly writing are so deeply intertwined as to be almost inseparable. Reading at the college level is never just a passive act of absorbing information; it involves an active dialogue that, like a good conversation, gives birth to new ideas, new ways of seeing, and — as these thoughts find their way into words — new texts. As the nineteenth-century philosopher and essayist Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in “The American Scholar” (1837), “One must be an inventor to read well. . . . There is then creative reading as well as creative writing.”[^4] Reading, thinking, crafting an argument, and revising are not entirely separable activities. To read is to think, to think is to reason and imagine arguments, to make an argument is to revise old ideas, and to revise is to read — creatively.

College professors are interested in your ideas, but students sometimes confuse ideas with opinions. By definition, an opinion is a judgment that rests on insufficient grounds, on data and reasoning that are too thin or vague to raise the opinion to the level of a hypothesis or theory. Of course, we all hold opinions about all sorts of things — social, political, religious, philosophical, and so on — that we’ve never studied in depth but that we know something about from hearsay or personal experience. And opinion is sometimes the best we can hope for: many questions are intrinsically undecidable and necessarily “matters of opinion.” (Who’s a better artist, Monet or Warhol?) As the cliché reminds us, we’re entitled to our opinions. But opinions in the stricter sense do not play a major role in academic writing. Instead, academic writing usually presents an informed argument, working with and against informed arguments made by others on the same or closely related subjects. Such arguments may or may not turn out to be valid or true, and their claims may or may not be proven. But every such argument aims to stand on sufficient grounds.

But even an uncertain argument is better than no argument at all—a point that Sam seems to have misunderstood. Judging from what he tells his sister in his e-mail, his essay apparently did little more than echo back ideas the professor had already discussed in class. The essay used a rather simplistic structure in a formulaic way; it used words that Sam didn’t really understand or need; and it incorporated material, like the quotation and the dictionary definition, designed to produce the appearance of scholarship rather than to say anything substantial or interesting or new. These devices did little to support Sam’s own argument—if indeed he had an argument of his own. But when Sam does start writing the kinds of essays his professors hope to read, he may well find the work much more exciting, creative, and satisfying than it used to be. The process will take more time, and he may still experience the occasional midnight agony when up against a deadline, but he’ll be involved in and committed to this work time after time. As another student, Zach Benabid, remarked: “The way I write papers [in college] is completely different from high school. In the past, I’d try to write the final draft right away. Now, when I revise a paper, I butcher it; it’s a completely different paper. I’m not satisfied or confident in the paper unless I go through seven drafts.”

As Zach suggests, there is no simple formula for producing college-level essays. The five-paragraph model that you might have learned in high school will no longer suffice, and a rapid, last-minute writing process will no longer work. The remainder of this book offers some strategies for developing ideas about your reading and for expressing these ideas in essay form.

## Thinking Critically about a Text
Earlier in this chapter, we looked at a paragraph from Nicholas Carr’s “Is Google Making Us Stupid?” Now read the rest of Carr’s essay (p. 000), and choose one of the following options.

Option 1. Identify at least two other passages that seem to you to embody the values of the academy, as described on pages 0–0. Carr is a journalist, and although he is writing for a general audience here rather than a strictly scholarly community, his writing exhibits some of the characteristics of academic discourse. Identify at least two or three passages or sentences that, in your view, reveal these characteristics. In your notes, explain what qualities each passage exhibits and how it does so. Be prepared to discuss your conclusions in class.

Option 2. Using one of the three sample writing assignments from this introduction (pp. 00–00) as a general guide, write an assignment for Carr’s essay that requires students to engage in critical thinking. It might be a formal essay assignment or a short, informal homework or even an in-class activity. But it should ask students to analyze the text, not merely repeat what they learned from it.