---
lang: en-US
title: Why Do College Instructors Assign Writing?
description: Explains the purpose writing assignments in typical college courses
---

[[toc]]

## Why Do College Instructors Assign Writing?
To understand what you need to accomplish in a college essay or paper, it helps to have a clear sense of why professors give writing assignments. If they simply wanted to make sure that you had read the textbook carefully or listened attentively to lectures, they could give a multiple-choice test — which takes much less time and effort to grade than an essay. But most tests only require you to regurgitate content that the course fed to you in some form. They ask you to behave a little like a sponge: you absorb knowledge and, when asked, squeeze it out again, in pretty much the same form that you took it in. This kind of learning certainly has its value: much of what a doctor or an engineer or any expert needs to know has to be learned by rote memorization, and tests are a necessary means of making sure that students have mastered the material. But this kind of learning is not necessarily the deepest or richest kind. It doesn’t compel learners to think carefully about ideas or do anything with them. True expertise requires much more than just an ability to recite memorized facts and definitions: in the real world, we need to use knowledge, to apply old ideas in new situations, to solve problems, to analyze data and draw conclusions, to see patterns, to make predictions, to make connections between concepts, to assess the merits of a hypothesis, and in a host of other ways to think creatively with what we know. These skills define true expertise just as much as — or even more than — the possession of a body of information. So professors typically ask students to write essays in order to give them the opportunity not only to practice such skills but also to get to know key concepts well enough to be able to use them in the real world.

For this reason, essay assignments typically expect a different kind of work from you than exams and tests do. An essay assignment often poses a problem to which there is no single right answer and no tidy solution. Problems of this kind require us to do the kind of deeper analytic, synthetic, evaluative, and creative thinking just described; they compel us to become actively involved in our learning in a way that exams rarely do. Very often, an essay assignment requires each student to develop an original argument in support of the student’s own solution or approach or perspective on a problem.

Let’s look at some representative college writing assignments. All of these are taken from actual introductory college courses.

>**A “Close Reading” Essay on Paradise Lost** (Humanities): Choose a short passage (10–15 lines) from Book I of Paradise Lost that in your view stands as a “microcosm” of the work as a whole. Analyze it in terms of form (imagery, style, figurative language) and content (meaning, literal truth), and discuss the ways in which form and content are related to each other in the passage. Provide a very specific analysis of the passage, but also communicate your sense of the ways in which the passage reflects, contains, and synthesizes issues and qualities of the work as a whole. Length: 5–7 pages. Format: MLA.

>**Analysis of a News Story** (Sociology): Write an essay that uses one or more of the sociological concepts we have learned this semester to analyze an article from a newsmagazine such as Time, Newsweek, or U.S. News and World Report. Choose your article with care, and decide on one or more appropriate sociological concepts that can help the reader understand the sociological dimension of the story. In your essay, you must explain the sociological concept, explain the article, and apply the sociological concept to the article. Length: 5–6 pages. Format: Chicago style.

>**Inferences about Eighteenth-Century Society** (History): Choose one chapter from Christopher Moore’s *Louisbourg Portraits: Life in an Eighteenth-Century Garrison Town.* Write an essay that explains what the life of the individual in question tells us about eighteenth-century society (e.g., social relations, class, race, gender). Do not draw on outside sources for this assignment. Instead, use the selected chapter and your knowledge of concepts from lectures and discussions to generalize from the particular. Length: 6–8 pages, double-spaced. Include a title page with your name and the name of your TA on it. Format: Chicago style.

All three assignments ask students to work carefully with a text and to use concepts from the course to draw conclusions of their own. The first assignment is from a humanities course: students have been reading and discussing the seventeenth-century English poet John Milton’s *Paradise Lost* for several weeks. The instructor wants her students to work closely with just a few lines from the poem, but she wants them to demonstrate that they comprehend the major themes and issues of the poem as a whole, by relating the lines to the rest of the poem. She also wants them to practice for themselves the kind of literary analysis that she has been demonstrating in her lectures and discussions. The most interesting papers, and likely the most successful, will be those that work with a passage that hasn’t been discussed in class at any length and thus offer original insights into the poem.

The second assignment also requires students to work with a text, but this is not a literary analysis; here, the instructor wants his students to demonstrate that they not only understand sociological concepts in an abstract way but also can work with these concepts and show how they apply to and help us understand real-world situations. A successful essay will demonstrate a strong grasp of the concepts and use them in a precise way, but it will also show some creativity and insight in working with the news story, probing details that a casual reader might overlook and noticing patterns that reveal the sociological background.

The third assignment, for a history course, also asks students to work with a text. In this case, the professor wants students to make generalizations based on a particular example — a single individual described in one of the chapters of *Louisbourg Portraits.* Students will need to apply the knowledge of eighteenth-century society that they have gathered from lectures and other texts as they develop their argument. But their argument will need to be supported by specific details from the text. Like professional historians, students will need to pay careful attention to the clues — the telling details — in the source text in order to make inferences about the society of that time. Because students are working with just one life, this assignment will involve some guesswork, and they might not be quite certain that their inferences are valid. But making this kind of educated guess based on evidence from documents is the only means historians have of drawing conclusions about the past. While the assignment does require students to do the special sort of work that professional historians do, it also requires students to develop analytical skills that are widely applicable.

When you write an essay, it is more important to demonstrate your thinking skills than to be precisely “right,” in the sense of repeating an answer that has already been defined as correct, as you might do on an exam. And essays give you the opportunity to show your professor what you, as a unique individual, can do with the concepts that he or she has been teaching, to explain the distinct meaning and interest that they have for you. Think of an instructor sitting down to read thirty or more essays on basically the same subject. For both your sake and the instructor’s, it’s a good idea to make your essay interesting. As a colleague of mine used to say, with only slight exaggeration, “It’s more important to be interesting than to be right.” While a frivolous argument made just for the sake of being clever wouldn’t pass muster in most college courses (and probably wouldn’t be very interesting), my colleague wanted to address a different and more common problem with freshman writing: the fact that the arguments are often too correct—too familiar, too superficial, too simplistic, too dull. By encouraging students to find something interesting to say, she wasn’t inviting them to develop arguments that were outlandish or implausible. Instead, she was asking them to be willing to take risks, to think deeply enough about a problem to develop ideas of their own, ones that, if not absolutely new and original, were at least fresh and engaging.

With most assignments, a strong essay makes a clear and convincing argument for an original insight. There are two sides to writing this kind of essay: the thinking side and the communicating side. When professors assign an essay, they typically have both sides in mind: providing the opportunity for you to learn on your own as you figure out what you’re going to say, and providing the opportunity to share your thinking with your professor. As a rule, these two sides emerge in the writing process as two different phases: in the early stages, you focus mostly on **writing to learn,** figuring out your ideas and finding something to say; in the later stages, you focus more on **writing to communicate,** finding a way of arranging and expressing your ideas that will make sense to, and persuade, the reader. Writing to learn tends to be inward-looking: it involves your own struggle to figure things out in a way that makes sense to you. Writing to communicate is outward-looking: now that you have some ideas, you’re concerned with expressing them effectively to someone who cannot see inside your mind and has no way of understanding your ideas except through the words you put onto the page. These twin goals of the writing process — the writer’s need to understand and the reader’s need to understand — are equally important and will receive roughly equal emphasis in the chapters that follow. Early chapters emphasize writing to learn, and later chapters emphasize writing to communicate. Both phases are essential to a successful paper.

::: details Try This: Exploring Key Terms
Look up the following terms in a good dictionary: opinion, argument, hypothesis, thesis, theory. Choose two and write a brief essay or journal entry explaining the difference between the two words.
:::
